bmapathway
==========

This repository contains [MATLAB](www.mathworks.com/products/matlab)
source code and scripts for integrated analysis of genetic variants
and pathways in genome-wide data sets for seven complex diseases:
bipolar disorder (BD), coronary artery disease (CAD), Crohn's disease
(CD), hypertension (HT), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), type 1 diabetes
(T1D) and type 2 diabetes (T2D). These data sets are from the Wellcome
Trust Case-Control Consortium (WTCCC) studies; the results of these
studies were
[published in Nature in 2007](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature05911).

Running these MATLAB scripts should reproduce the results presented in
the *PLoS Genetics* paper, **Integrated enrichment analysis of
variants and pathways in genome-wide association studies indicates
central role for IL-2 signaling genes in type 1 diabetes, and cytokine
signaling genes in Crohn's disease.** For more details on the methods
used, consult the *PLoS Genetics* paper.

This repository also contains MATLAB code implementing statistical
procedures to (1) interrogate support for enrichment of disease
associations in genome-wide data; and (2) map genetic variants
associated with disease risk. Importantly, the genome-wide mapping
**prioritizes variants assigned to enriched gene sets, in an attempt
to enhance discovery of genes underlying complex diseases.** Our
statistical procedures are based on fitting multi-marker models of
disease to the data. We use Bayesian model averaging (BMA) in
large-scale multivariate regression to quantify support for enrichment
models, and to infer disease associations conditioned on these models.

###License

Copyright (c) 2013, Peter Carbonetto.

The bmapathway project repository by
[Peter Carbonetto](http://github.com/pcarbo) is free software: you can
redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the
[GNU General Public License](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html)
as published by the Free Software Foundation, either
version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

The bmapathway project repository is distributed in the hope that it
will be useful, but **without any warranty**; without even the implied
warranty of **merchantability** or **fitness for a particular
purpose**. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more details.

###A note about the data

Explain that data cannot be made available to the public. Even if we
were allowed to release the data, github would not permit us to store
all the data because it would take up several Gb of space.

Additional files giving gene and pathway information. Mention that
gene information is based on Human Genome Assembly 17 (NCBI Build 35)
because the SNP data from the WTCCC case-control disease studies are
based on this assembly.

###Overview of the MATLAB code

The [MATLAB](MATLAB) folder is organized into several subfolders. All
the MATLAB code (.m files) is found within these subfolders. There are
many files in these subfolders defining various MATLAB functions used
for our statistical methods. Here we point out the most important
folders and files, and explain when they might be useful.

+ The **[analysis](MATLAB/analysis)** folder contains the main scripts
  that run all steps of the integrated analysis for the seven
  diseases, and a few other functions for loading structures used in
  the analysis. All these scripts have several stages to the analysis,
  and you need to generate the results of these stages in order to
  complete the analysis. For example, the analysis of the Crohn's
  disease data set takes 11 separate steps, which includes computation
  of posterior quantities from the multi-marker model without
  pathways, then later computes Bayes factors for pathways and
  combinations of pathways, and this is all implemented in Stages A
  through K in script [cdpath.m](MATLAB/analysis/cdpath.m).

+ The **[data](MATLAB/data)** folder contains several functions and a
  script, [getwtcccdata.m](MATLAB/data/getwtcccdata.m), for acquiring
  and processing the genotype data, and for storing it in a convenient
  format for subsequent analysis steps. The genotype data was
  originally stored in files for use by the program
  [BIMBAM](http://www.bcm.edu/cnrc/mcmcmc/index.cfm?pmid=18981), but
  these files are not available here because they are large, and would
  infringe on privacy needs. Therefore, these functions are unlikely
  to be useful unless you have access to these files, or to the files
  from the original WTCCC analysis.

+ Inside the **[genes](MATLAB/genes)** folder are functions and a
  script, [getgenedata.m](MATLAB/genes/getgenedata.m), for reading
  gene information files into MATLAB. The MATLAB data file
  [gene_35.1.mat](data/gene_35.1.mat) generated by this script,
  containing information about genes corresponding to version 17 of
  the Human Genome Assembly 17 (NCBI Build 35.1), is provided in this
  repository.

+ Likewise, the **[pathways](MATLAB/pathways)** folder contains a
  number of functions and a script,
  [getpathwaydata.m](MATLAB/pathways), for reading the pathway
  annotations from the various pathway databases (Reactome, KEGG,
  PANTHER, *etc*) into MATLAB. The final MATLAB data file
  [pathway.mat](data/pathway.mat) containing the gene set annotations
  for all 3160 candidate pathways included in our analyses, is
  provided in this repository.

+ The **[mhc](MATLAB/mhc)** folder contains a couple functions used to
  specify the annotations corresponding to the major
  histocompatibility complex (MHC) and the "extended" MHC.

+ The **[stats](MATLAB/stats)** folder contains a few functions that
  calculate various statistical quantities that are useful for the
  analysis.

+ Finally, the **[misc](MATLAB/misc)** folder contains several
  miscellaneous functions that are used by the other functions.

###Downloading and using the MATLAB code

Explain how to download the code, either by downloading and unpacking
the ZIP file, or cloning the repository from the command line.

Add MATLAB directory and all subdirectories to your MATLAB path using
the addpath function in MATLAB.

You will need to download the functions implemented in the varbvs
repository, and add these functions to your path.

Code was run in MATLAB 7.10 (R2010a). Has partially been run
successfully in MATLAB 7.14 (R2012a). Has not been completely tested
in more up-to-date versions of MATLAB. Explain that 

###Credits

All MATLAB source code contained in this repository was developed by:<br>
[Peter Carbonetto](http://www.cs.ubc.ca/spider/pcarbo)<br>
Dept. of Human Genetics<br>
University of Chicago<br>
August 2013
